# Java Strings

The `String` class represents character strings. All string literals in Java programs, such as `"abc"`, are implemented as instances of this class. Strings are **immutable**; their values cannot be changed after they are created.

```
System.out.println("abc");
String cde = "cde";
System.out.println("abc" + cde);
String c = "abc".substring(2,3);
String d = cde.substring(1, 2);
```

The class `String` includes methods for examining individual characters of the sequence, for comparing strings, for searching strings, for extracting substrings, and for creating a copy of a string with all characters translated to uppercase or to lowercase and so on.


## Strings in memory

Being immutable, when created using `String s = "something"` they are stored in a special pool in which the same string is stored only once.

```
// memory use
String first = "Baeldung";

// no actual memory use
String second = "Baeldung";

// True
System.out.println(first == second);
```

Instead, when created using the `new` operator, Strings are stored in memory (heap) as standard objects. As such, each string occupies its own memory.

```
// memory use
String first = new String("Baeldung");

// memory use
String second = new String("Baeldung");

// memory use
String third = "Baeldung";

// False
System.out.println(first == second);

// False
System.out.println(first == third);
```

## Comparing strings
The **== operator** verifies if two references objects point to the same object. On the contrary, the **equal() method** verifies if two objects (any object!) have the same internal state.

```
String s1 = "hello";
String s2 = "hello";

// true! Same object! They are both saved in the string pool.
if (s1 == s2) { ... }

// true
if (s1.equals(s2)) { ... }

String s1 = new String("hello");
String s2 = new String("hello");

// false! Different objects!
if (s1 == s2) { ... }

// true
if (s1.equals(s2)) { ... }
```


## Concatenating strings

### The + operator
The `+` can be used to concatenate 2 or more strings. It can also concatenate variables of other types which are automatically converted to the String type before being concatenated.

```
String s = "This string" + " is made " + "by three substrings";

System.out.println("#students = " + 3);
System.out.println("PI = " + 3.1415);
```

### StringBuilder
Being strings immutable, **when two Strings are concatenated using +, the two strings are actually discarded and a new one (containing their concatenation) is instantiated.** This process is **slow!**. 

`StringBuilder` provides a better way for concatenating strings.

```java
public class ConcatenateBenchmark {
    public static String concatenateSlow(int iterations) {
        // slow version
        String s = "";
        for (int i = 0; i < iterations; i++) {
            s += 'a';
        }
        return s;
    }

    public static String concatenateFast(int iterations) {
        // fast version using StringBuilder
        StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder();
        for (int i = 0; i < iterations; i++) {
            sb.append('a');
        }
        return sb.toString();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        long start = System.nanoTime();
        concatenateSlow(10000);
        long end = System.nanoTime();
        System.out.println("Execution time: " + Duration.ofNanos(end - start).toMillis() + "ms");
    }
}
```

## String main methods
`charAt()` Returns the character at the specified index (position)

`compareTo()` Compares two strings lexicographically

`concat()` Appends a string to the end of another string

`contains()` Checks whether a string contains a sequence of characters

`endsWith()` Checks whether a string ends with the specified character(s)

`isEmpty()` Checks whether a string is empty or not

`length()` Returns the length of a specified string

`replace()` Searches a string for a specified value, and returns a new string where those values are replaced

`split()` Splits a string into an array of substrings 

`startsWith()` Checks whether a string starts with specified characters

`substring()` Returns a new string which is the substring of a specified string

`valueOf()` Returns the string representation of the specified value

## Standard streams
Java has 3 streams called `System.in`, `System.out`, and `System.err` which are commonly used to provide input to, and output from Java applications. Most commonly used is probably `System.out` for writing output to the console from console programs (command line applications). They are initialized by the Java runtime when a Java VM starts up, so you don't have to instantiate any streams yourself.
* `System.in` is an `InputStream` which is typically connected to keyboard input of console programs.
* `System.out` is a `PrintStream` to which you can write characters. It normally outputs the data you write to it to the console/terminal.
* `System.err` is a `PrintStream`. It works like `System.out` except it is normally only used to output error texts. 

### PrintStream Methods

Prints a string:
```
void print(String s)
```

Prints a string and adds a newline:
```
void println(String s)
```

Writes a formatted string using the specified format string and arguments:
```
void printf(String format, Object... args)
```

Returns a formatted string using the specified format string and arguments:
```
String String.format(String format, Object... args)
```


## Acquiring primitive types from the keyboard
**Scanner is a text scanner which can parse primitive types and strings using regular expressions.** It **breaks its input into tokens** using a delimiter pattern, which by default matches whitespace. The resulting tokens may then be **converted into values of different types** using the various _next_ methods.

```
/* from stdin */
Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);
int i = sc.nextInt();

/* from a file */
Scanner sc = new Scanner(new File("myNumbers"));
while (sc.hasNextLong()) {
    long aLong = sc.nextLong();
}
```
